Add explanatory in-depth guide on colors and colormaps (#3844)
Napari/napari: docs/guides/color.md

(color)=

# Colors and colormaps

This document describes how to programmatically define colors and colormaps in napari.
It is intended for users of napari that are comfortable using the napari API and
developers who want to include color as part of something they are building.

## Colors

In many places, napari allows the specification of color.
This might be the color of an individual point, the color of text annotations, or a color value in a colormap.
For example, the face color of all points in a layer can be defined as red.

```python
In [1]: points.face_color = 'red'
```

### Standard form

Internally, napari typically coerces an input color value like `'red'` to an RGBA (red, green, blue, alpha)
array with `shape=(4,)` and `dtype=np.float32` where the values are in `[0, 1]`.

> When storing N color values, a similar array of `shape=(N, 4)` is used where each row represents a single color value.

Reviewer: You'll need to explain what each of the positions means (i.e. red, green, blue, alpha). I don't know if that explanation needs to go here or in the next paragraph, but just dumping the example color array on your reader without explaining what the bits mean is difficult for the reader.

Author: Good point. I've added a bit more explanation here. Please take another look after the next push.

For example, reading the points layer's red face color gives us such an array.

```python

> In [2]: points.face_color

Reviewer: You should describe that there are three points in this example.

Author: Done.

```python
In [4]: points.face_color
Out[4]:
array([[1., 0., 0., 1.],
       [0., 1., 0., 1.],
       [0., 0., 1., 1.]])
```

For the most part, any tuple, list, array, or generator of single colors
is acceptable input when specifying multiple colors.

```python
# Tuple, list, array, or generator of names
points.face_color = ('red', 'lime', 'blue')
points.face_color = ['red', 'lime', 'blue']
points.face_color = np.array(['red', 'lime', 'blue'])
points.face_color = c for c in ('red', 'lime', 'blue')

# List of RGB or RGBA tuples or lists
points.face_color = [
    (1, 0, 0),
    (0, 1, 0),
    (0, 0, 1),
]
points.face_color = [
    [1, 0, 0, 1],
    [0, 1, 0, 1],
    [0, 0, 1, 1],
]

# (N, 3) RGB or (N, 4) RGBA array
points.face_color = np.array([
    [1, 0, 0],
    [0, 1, 0],
    [0, 0, 1],
])
points.face_color = np.array([
    [1, 0, 0, 1],
    [0, 1, 0, 1],
    [0, 0, 1, 1],
])
```

However, when specifying many colors in a sequence or generator *do not mix different single color types*.
For example, something like

```python
In [5]: points.face_color = np.array(['red', (0, 1, 0), '#0000ff'])
```

is not supported or guaranteed to work.

> ## Colormaps

Reviewer: I think one of the major reasons people search for colormaps in the napari documentation is so they can see the list of available colormaps. Do we have a list available? I understand that might work best as a supporting page to this one, since this page is explanation, and the reference list would be, well, a reference.

From memory, I think it includes most (but not all) matplotlib colormaps, plus also some extra colormaps other people made. Most napari colormaps are visible from the colormap drowdown box in the napari viewer, but not all of them are.

I'm always visiting the [matplotlib colormap page](https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/colors/colormaps.html) to see a list with images beside them.

Reviewer 2: I agree it is nice to have a visual representation of available colormaps.

The `Image` layer tutorial has a [section on available colormaps](
https://napari.org/tutorials/fundamentals/image.html#working-with-colormaps). It gives a function to see the available colormaps, but doesn't show them. I wonder if we could add a page that autogenerates colormap swatches from this function.

Author: Yep, like @kevinyamauchi mentioned the user can call `list(napari.utils.colormaps.AVAILABLE_COLORMAPS)`, which is also mentioned in this doc.

Note that `AVAILABLE_COLORMAPS` is mutable, though is initially populated with the colormaps you suspected (also described in this doc). In particular, you can use a colormap that isn't present initially using a uniquely vispy name (e.g. `image.colormap = 'coolwarm'`), which is not initially in `AVAILABLE_COLORMAPS`, but will be added.

My guess is the default colormaps will not change too frequently, so it would probably be OK to generate a one-off plot of the current ones and include that as an image. But ideally, they would be autogenerated right here, maybe with some surrounding text describing each set of colormaps (as the matplotlib docs do). Should that be fairly straightforward @GenevieveBuckley ?

Reviewer 3: Maybe this is the occation to take a page out of [vispy's "autogenerated gallery"'s book](https://github.com/vispy/vispy/blob/main/vispy/util/gallery_scraper.py)?

Reviewer 4: I don't think exhaustivity is necessary here, I would go for a curated list of good colormaps.
Otherwise you will start to expose things like `Jet`,  or `Spectral` vs `spectral`

Author: @Carreau : I didn't realize that our colormap names are case sensitive.

There seems to some split opinion on whether this should be exhaustive or not. I lean towards including an exhaustive reference of all the default colormaps for the reasons mentioned by @GenevieveBuckley @kevinyamauchi. So maybe let me try to generate that and see what we think?

Reviewer 4: I think the case sensitivity is a (matplotlib) historical artifact that they are trying to get rid of. Maybe they even already did in latests, but it used to be the case.

Reviewer 5: In the UI we only expose a curated list for the reasons mentioned by @Carreau, and I would suggest that we do the same here: expose a curated list, then link out to matplotlib's docs to say, "any matplotlib colormap will also work if provided as a name with the API". That is actually better (imho) because it ensures that we stay up to date if matplotlib updates, since that is technically what we are doing: calling out to matplotlib when the colormap is not in our prepopulated list.

Author: Oops, I didn't actually realize that we support every matplotlib colormap (at least the ones that I tried), even the qualitative ones. In that case, agreed that we should have a curated list and a link out to the matplotlib docs.

I think the initial/default value of `AVAILABLE_COLORMAPS` is the curated list we want - it's what we initially see in the GUI and it's relatively short (~20 colormaps).

Reviewer 2: I agree the default `AVAILABLE_COLORMAPS` is probably the right selection of colormaps to show. If it turns out to be a ton of effort, I am open to adding it in a follow-up PR, as this PR is already a solid chunk of work and is super informative as-is!

> In general, a colormap is a function that maps from an arbitrary domain to a some color space range.

Reviewer 2: This feels a little jargon-ey to me. It might be fine, as this is a document is targeted towards. Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
In general, a colormap is a function that specifies how data values are represented as colors.
```

Author: You're right. I went for something slightly different and shorter.

```A colormap maps data values to RGBA colors.```

Then modified the text around that appropriately. Please take another look in the next push.

Reviewer 5: That's a great sentence.

Reviewer 2: > Then modified the text around that appropriately. Please take another look in the next push.

Looks good to me!

)
```

In this case, values of 0 are mapped to black (`[0, 0, 0, 1]`),
values of 1 are mapped to blue (`[0, 0, 1, 1]`),
and values in `(0, 1)` are mapped to colors that are linearly interpolated
between black and blue.

A few types of input are supported.
The easiest to use is the colormap name as above.
```python
image.colormap = 'blue'
```

By default colormap names come from one of the following sources.

- Some of [matplotlib's colormap names](https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/colors/colormaps.html).
- Standard optical primary and secondary colors: `'red', 'green', 'blue', 'yellow', 'magenta', 'cyan'`.
- BOP (blue, orange, purple) colormap names: `'bop blue', 'bop orange', 'bop purple'`.

More specifically, the available colormap names can be listed at any time.

```python
In [8]: list(napari.utils.colormaps.AVAILABLE_COLORMAPS)
Out[8]:
['PiYG',
 'blue',
 'bop blue',
 ...,
 'viridis',
 'yellow']
```

If there is a need for a custom colormap that is not available by default,
pass an instance of a napari `Colormap`

```python
image.colormap = Colormap(
    colors=[[0, 0, 0, 1], [0, 0, 1, 1]],
    name='blue',
    interpolation='linear',
    controls=[0, 1],

> )

Reviewer 2: i think it would be nice to add the `Colormap` import to this snippet.

Author: Done.

```

which will be added to `AVAILABLE_COLORMAPS` after it is successfully created.
Equivalently, pass a `dict` representation of the same colormap.

```python
image.colormap = {
    'colors': [[0, 0, 0, 1], [0, 0, 1, 1]],
    'name': 'blue',
    'interpolation': 'linear',
    'controls': [0, 1],
}
```

Any single color value that is not a string can also be used

```python
image.colormap = (0, 0, 1)
```

in which case a colormap from black to the given color will be generated.
In general, the color value cannot be given as a name string because strings
are reserved to refer to existing colormap names.

### Categorical maps

The [`CategoricalColormap`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/c86cf87a788b1bbe62afc0b92b9ebdca1331a3e5/napari/utils/colormaps/categorical_colormap.py#L13)
class defines a map from a categorical or discrete value to a color.
It is defined by two components.

1. A dictionary that maps from values to colors.
2. A cycle of fallback colors that used when a value is not found in the dictionary.

> For example, a points layer's face color could be mapped from an optional cell type

Reviewer 2: I think the setup for this example should introduce the layer data and property values. Without, I think this would be a bit confusing for people that aren't already familiar with coloring points with properties.

This would be an example of something that might be better in a "how-to" document than an "explanatory" document.

Author: That's a good point. My goal was to mainly focus on explanation here, partly because we already have some how-to-ish docs in the layer tutorials.

Maybe it would make more sense to discuss the `map` method of `Colormap` and `CategoricalColormap` instead of the points example to better describe how these things work, rather than how they are used in napari?

Reviewer 2: I agree that it's best to focus on the explanation rather than the implementation. In light of that, I think your idea to discuss `map` from `Colormap` and `CategoricalColormap` is a good alternative!

```python
In  [9]: points.properties = {'cell_type': ['astrocyte', 'microglia', None]}
In [10]: points.face_color_cycle = {
             'colormap': {
                 'astrocyte': 'red',
                 'oligodendrocyte': 'yellow',
                 None: 'blue',
             },
             'fallback_color': ['lime', 'magenta', 'cyan'],
         }
In [11]: points.face_color = 'cell_type'
In [12]: points.face_color
Out[12]:
array([[1., 0., 0., 1.],
       [0., 1., 0., 1.],
       [0., 0., 1., 1.]], dtype=float32)
```

Alternatively, a dictionary alone can be used to define the mapping

```python
In [13]: points.face_color_cycle = {
            'astrocyte': 'red',
            'oligodendrocyte': 'yellow',
            None: 'blue',
         }
```

in which case the fallback color will default to `['white']`.

Or a sequence alone can be used to defined the fallback color cycle

```python
In [14]: points.face_color_cycle = ['lime', 'magenta', 'cyan']
```

in which case the mapping will initially be an empty dictionary.
As values from the fallback cycle are used, the value to color mappings
they define will be added to the dictionary.

> 

Reviewer: Should there be a section on how to make custom colormaps?

Author: Good point. For the `CategoricalColormap`, it's effectively always custom because there are no default/built-in ones (though maybe there should be!).

I added a bit more detail and some extra subsections to help clarify how to customize a colormap. Please take another look after the next push.

Reviewer 4: Should we warn users that when using a cycle then the color mapping may not be stable between ?
I'm not too familiar with `ColorCycle`, can they be infinite when creating them manually instead of base on a dict ? Like i can imagine writing a generator that always return a new color ?

Author: By not stable, I assume you mean that as input values are found that are missing from the dict, we use the next value from the fallback cycle (which does repeat indefinitely), and add a new entry to the dict (i.e. the dict is mutated as missing values are found). And that this is sensitive to the input data - specifically the order in which the input values are found.

If so, I added an extra to explicitly clarify that's the behavior here.

Reviewer 5: Yeah seeing it written out is very useful but makes me feel like this is a bad model and we should not support it going forward. That is, maybe categorical colormaps should be required to be a direct *and complete* mapping?

Of course, this is the current behaviour so I'm cool with leaving it here and documented and updating the docs when we change it, I just mean, seeing it written out really makes me think that it's pretty absurd.

And just to go back full circle, I can see as a user how you might *not know* ahead of time what the categories are, and in that case you really just want to say "map this to a bunch of different colours for me thx". Perhaps some utility functions to create categorical maps from data can be exposed?

Anyway, if we all agree, I guess we can make a specific issue about it, but wanted to get everyone's feeling on this.

Reviewer 4: Are you maybe annoyed by the fact that the undetermined categories are a cycle ? 
Would you feel better if the reasoning to choose the color is an implementation detail of the colormap ? Like a hash of the category that could be stable ? 

But maybe let's move that a a separate issue ?

Author: I think it's OK to have a little discussion here, because docs are a good way to clarify behavior and generate discussion.

Agreed there are two main use cases here.

1. You know all the possible discrete values and want to completely specify the mapping.
2. You don't know all the possible discrete values and/or don't care how they are mapped, but want to pick the set of colors they are mapped to.

I think the current API and implementation of `CategoricalColormap` fulfills both use cases, so I think it's fine as is. In use case 2 the `CategoricalColormap::map` has side-effects on the mapping that are sensitive to order of data encountered, but in that use-case we don't really care about the details of the mapping (except the set of values), so I don't think it's too important.

It also fulfills a third use case, which mixes the two - you specify a partial mapping and more than one fallback color - which I doubt is common, but I don't think there's much harm in supporting it.

It is intended for users of napari that are comfortable using the napari API and
developers who want to include color as part of something they are building.

## Colors

In many places, napari allows the specification of color.
This might be the color of an individual point, the color of text annotations, or a color value in a colormap.
For example, the face color of all points in a layer can be defined as red.

```python
In [1]: points.face_color = 'red'
```

### Standard form

Internally, napari typically coerces an input color value like `'red'` to an RGBA (red, green, blue, alpha)
array with `shape=(4,)` and `dtype=np.float32` where the values are in `[0, 1]`.
Each element of this array defines the contribution of each RGBA color component to the overall color,
where a value of 0 means there is no contribution and a value of 1 means that component is saturated.

For example, a purely `'red'` color is coerced to the array `[1, 0, 0, 1]` where the red component is
saturated, but the green and blue components do not contribute at all.
The last element (alpha) similarly describes the opacity of the color, where a value of 0 corresponds to

> transparent and a value of 1 corresponds to opaque.

Reviewer 3: I would add here that in general omitting `alpha` is equivalent to setting it to `1`.

For example, reading the points layer's red face color gives us such an array

```python
In [2]: points.face_color
Out[2]:
array([[1., 0., 0., 1.],
       [1., 0., 0., 1.],
       [1., 0., 0., 1.]])
```

where in this case there are `N=3` points.

The [`transform_color`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/5f96d5d814aad697c367bdadbb1a57750e2114ad/napari/utils/colormaps/standardize_color.py#L33)
function is responsible for coercing color input values to the standard form and supports a variety of inputs.

```{note}
The [`ColorType`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/43d9b59da89b9a2b97dba3967a7b28526f9aa0ce/napari/utils/colormaps/colormap_utils.py#L17)
type definition almost describes all the types of acceptable color inputs, except that it includes
vispy's `Color` and `ColorArray`, which are not accepted by `transform_color`.
```

### Supported single color input

The single face color could have been defined as red in many equivalent ways.

```python
# CSS3 name
points.face_color = 'red'

# matplotlib single character name
points.face_color = 'r'

# RGB or RGBA hex-code
points.face_color = '#ff0000'

> points.face_color = '#ff0000ff'

Reviewer 4: You seem to try to be exhaustive, do you want to add that "short hex" notation also works ? 
Basically any `#XXYYZZ`, can be shorten to `#XYZ`  (`#XXYYZZAA` to `#XYZA`)

Author: Done.

Reviewer 4: I think you did not push...

Reviewer 4: Likely because I rebased,you did not pull and your push failed and you did not notice.

Author: Sorry, I just didn't push yet, as I'm making a few updates. Will comment when I do!

Author: Should be pushed now.

# RGB or RGBA tuple, list, or array
points.face_color = (1, 0, 0)
points.face_color = (1, 0, 0, 1)
points.face_color = [1, 0, 0]
points.face_color = [1, 0, 0, 1]
points.face_color = np.array([1, 0, 0])

> points.face_color = np.array([1, 0, 0, 1])

Reviewer 3: Alternatively, the "no alpha is alpha=1" concept could go here.

Author: Yep, I think this is a good place because it's related to user input. I.e. if I don't provide an alpha value explicitly, this should explain what default value it will take.

function is used to coerce colormap input values to an instance of napari's [`Colormap`](https://github.com/napari/napari/blob/c86cf87a788b1bbe62afc0b92b9ebdca1331a3e5/napari/utils/colormaps/colormap.py#L28).

```python
In [7]: image.colormap
Out[7]:
Colormap(
    colors=np.array([0., 0., 0., 1], [0., 0., 1., 1]]),
    name='blue',
    interpolation=<ColormapInterpolationMode.LINEAR: 'linear'>,
    controls=array([0., 1.]),
)
```

In the `Colormap` object returned, the `controls` attribute defines the
input data values that the colormap maps from and the `colors` attribute
defines the output colors that it maps to.
The `interpolation` attribute defines how to interpolate `color` when an
input value does not exactly equal one of the values in `controls`.
And the `name` attribute gives the colormap a name that can be referred to later.

In this case, input data values of 0 are mapped to black (`[0, 0, 0, 1]`),
values of 1 are mapped to blue (`[0, 0, 1, 1]`),
and values in `(0, 1)` are mapped to colors that are linearly interpolated

> between black and blue.

Reviewer 4: What about data that fall outside of the contols range ? Maybe you want to add they are clipped ?

Author: I simply edited the current sentence to include `0 or less are mapped...` and `1 or more are mapped...`. Do you think that's sufficient or should I have a separate sentence to describe clipping?

Reviewer 4: No I think that's good !

#### Supported input

A few types of input are supported.
The easiest to use is the colormap name as above.

```python
image.colormap = 'blue'
```

By default colormap names come from one of the following sources.

- Some of [matplotlib's colormap names](https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/colors/colormaps.html).
- Standard optical primary and secondary colors: `'red', 'green', 'blue', 'yellow', 'magenta', 'cyan'`.

> - BOP (blue, orange, purple) colormap names: `'bop blue', 'bop orange', 'bop purple'`.

Reviewer 4: I'm guessing there is some implicit knowledge here, I don't know what/why BOP are a thing I found https://github.com/cleterrier/ChrisLUTs, so maybe they come from ImageJ, and they look like complementary, but maybe add a reference ?

Author: Yep, good idea. I remember when I search for bop colormap, I more easily found a minecraft mod call biomes o' plenty, so having an explicit reference is a good idea!

I also assume that repo you reference is the source for these colormaps, so I added that for now. But if anyone knows otherwise, please correct that!
